Are school uniforms necessary? In private school, uniforms are often the norm—but in
public school most students have the option of wearing casual dress when they come to
class. While uniforms may be restrictive and clash with personal preference, they
actually do have some good points. For example, it’s one less thing that students have to
worry about when they get ready for school in the morning. This paper will show why
mandatory school uniforms can actually make life easier for students and schools.
First of all, school uniforms can help to eliminate the problem of peer pressure that
students often face when trying to decide what they should wear. Considering the fact
that not every student has money to spend on the latest trends in fashion, school uniforms
offer a less expensive alternative that can eliminate the peer pressure that goes with
having to dress according to the latest styles. Students can focus more on studies and less
on trying to stand out, fit in, or be respected and admired based on the quality of their
fashion statements. True, students who want to express themselves stylistically will have
to find another way to assert themselves; however, for the majority of students, uniforms
would be a welcome change as there is never a question of having to decide what to wear
or fearing that one’s wardrobe isn’t good enough. Everyone is wearing the same thing!
Secondly, school uniforms can help to promote a more formal environment in the
school. That means students are more likely to adhere to the rules and regulations of the
school, as uniforms promote the concept of conformity and regularity—which is good for
schools! Uniforms suggest that everyone is on the same page and everyone is expected
to show up and do one’s duty. Uniforms encourage propriety, good form and good
manners. Uniformed students are more likely to show respect for their teachers than
students who are used to asserting themselves, demonstrating their own will and desire in
their dress, and showing off.
Finally, school uniforms foster school spirit. They help students to identify themselves as
members who owe allegiance to the school. They instill in students a sense of belonging
and the knowledge that they themselves represent the school. By wearing a uniform that
sports the logo or emblem of the school and the school’s colors, the students show that
they are willing to reflect the values and mission of the school in their own person. In
other words, uniforms help students to stifle their own self-centeredness and be part of
something bigger than themselves.
In conclusion, school uniforms offer a lot of positive qualities. Students who wear the
school uniform are less likely to face peer pressure about their fashion preferences than
students who do not have a uniform and must pick out their own wardrobe on a daily
basis. They are also more likely to respect authority and the rules of the school, and have
school pride. School uniforms might not be to everyone’s taste, but the benefits of
having them certainly cannot be denied.